Add AGENTS.md (#138005)
kubernetes/kubernetes: AGENTS.md

# Kubernetes

## Communication Preferences

- Dry, concise, low-key humor. No flattery, no forced memes. Skip preambles and postambles.
- Comments explain "why", not "what".
- Error messages: actionable and specific. No vague "something went wrong" output.

## Constraints

- **Generated files are read-only.** Never hand-edit `zz_generated.*` or `generated.pb.go`. Run `make update`.
- **go.mod/go.work are generated.** Use `hack/pin-dependency.sh` + `hack/update-vendor.sh`. Never `go mod tidy`.
- **Staging is source of truth** for `k8s.io/*` (`staging/src/k8s.io/`). Never import `k8s.io/kubernetes` from staging.
- **Boilerplate required.** Every `.go` file needs the license header from `hack/boilerplate/boilerplate.go.txt`.

## Commands

Run `make help` for all available targets. Common workflows:

```
make test WHAT=./pkg/kubelet GOFLAGS=-v     # Unit tests (one package)
make test-integration WHAT=./test/integration/scheduler
make verify                                 # All verification checks
make update                                 # ALL generators and formatters
```

> ## Style

Reviewer: I really think we should put a short summary of our AI contribution policy here.

Two things I actually created skills for:
a) writing a Kubernetes style commit message that does not add Co-authored-by: Claude.
b) Opening up a pull request that follows our pull request template.

I think this should be in the AGENTS.md for the repo honestly.

Reviewer 2: @kannon92 i am gonna land this. please do a fresh PR once this lands.

Reviewer 3: > a) writing a Kubernetes style commit message that does not add Co-authored-by: Claude.

This seems like a claude config option that should not be in the repo (We don't want to litter the repo with harness specific content ....).

FWIW, I just create commits and file pull requests myself 😱 
I don't think we're permitting completely agentic pull requests currently anyhow ...

# Kubernetes (K8s)

> This is the Kubernetes project, also known as K8s. It is an open-source container orchestrator released under the Apache 2 license, designed to run and manage workloads at scale on major cloud providers and on-premises.

Reviewer 3: I assume it already has been trained on "kubernetes" and "k8s", and we already cover most of these details in the README.md. IME virtually all models have some awareness of this project, kubectl, etc.
I don't think the model needs to know about the Apache 2 License here (versus the boilerplate header comment below)

Author: Removed

> You are an expert AI programming assistant specializing in the Go implementation of Kubernetes.

Reviewer 3: Is this a good use of tokens?

Author: Not really. Removed

## Communication Preferences

- Dry, concise, low-key humor. No flattery, no forced memes. Skip preambles and postambles.

> - No em dashes. Use commas, parentheses, or periods.

Reviewer 3: Why? em-dash is a perfectly cromulent character. And we're explicitly NOT trying to hide when LLMs are used, in fact we require disclosure ...

Author: Fixed

> - Comments explain "why", not "what". Cursing in comments allowed sparingly when the code warrants it.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we're ever cursing in the comments? Let's not suggest that.

Author: Fixed

- Error messages: actionable and specific. No vague "something went wrong" output.

## Critical Constraints

- **Generated files are read-only.** Never hand-edit `zz_generated.*` or `generated.pb.go`. Run `make update`.
- **go.mod/go.work are generated.** Use `hack/pin-dependency.sh` + `hack/update-vendor.sh`. Never `go mod tidy`.
- **Staging is source of truth** for `k8s.io/*` (`staging/src/k8s.io/`). Never import `k8s.io/kubernetes` from staging.

> - **Boilerplate required.** Every `.go` file needs Apache 2.0 header from `hack/boilerplate/boilerplate.go.txt`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Boilerplate required.** Every `.go` file needs the license header from `hack/boilerplate/boilerplate.go.txt`.
```

(avoid duplicating information, we want it to use the license header text from here, not fabricate it)

Author: Applied

- **Feature gates** alphabetically ordered (case-sensitive) in `pkg/features/kube_features.go`.

> - **OWNERS files** control review routing. Check when scoping changes.

Reviewer 3: This comment doesn't seem very actionable. 

If we want to teach it about OWNERS, we should probably link to go.k8s.io/OWNERS, but I'm not sure we need to, that's mostly a problem for the human submitting the PR. And even an automated agent will need to respond to the comments outlining this on the pull request, not at the time of writing a patch.

Author: Removed

> - Look for `AGENTS.md` in working directory and all parents. Closer files take priority.

Reviewer 3: Isn't this standard? Do we really need to specify this?

Author: Removed

## Rules

- Plan first. All changes must include tests. No TODOs in committed code. Correctness over cleverness.
- Packages: lowercase, single word, match directory. API types: PascalCase with json/protobuf tags.
- Conversion functions use underscores by convention: `Convert_v1_Pod_To_core_Pod()`, `SetDefaults_Pod()`.
- API changes need KEP approval, full path: types.go, validation.go, strategy.go, defaulting.go, codegen.

> - Feature gates: owner comment, optional KEP, versioned lifecycle, register in `defaultVersionedKubernetesFeatureGates`.

Reviewer 3: This seems like it would be better suited to a file closer to / in the featuregates package. 
Most changes are not touching featuregates and don't need to spend tokens on this.

Author: Removed

- Controllers: `pkg/controller/{name}/`, register in `cmd/kube-controller-manager/app/`, add integration tests.
- Codegen tags: `+k8s:deepcopy-gen=package`, `+genclient`, `+k8s:prerelease-lifecycle-gen:introduced=X.Y`.

> ## Commands (repo root)

Reviewer 3: Let's just tell it to use the makefile? The makefile is self-documenting.

Author: Updated

```

> make all                                    # Build all to _output/bin/

Reviewer 3: You rarely actually want to run this.

Author: removed

make test WHAT=./pkg/kubelet GOFLAGS=-v     # Unit tests (one package, verbose)
make test-integration WHAT=./test/integration/scheduler
make verify                                 # All verification checks
make lint                                   # golangci-lint
make update                                 # ALL generators and formatters
make clean                                  # Remove _output/
```

> ## Decision Rules

Reviewer 3: Most of this section seems redundant to the "critical constraints" section

Author: Removed

- **New API field:** types.go (with tags) -> `make update` -> validation -> strategy (if feature-gated).
- **New feature gate:** constant in `kube_features.go` (alpha order) -> versioned spec -> `hack/update-featuregates.sh`.
- **Modified API type in staging:** `make update`. Never hand-edit generated files.
- **Vendor changes:** `hack/pin-dependency.sh` then `hack/update-vendor.sh`. Never edit directly.
- **Codegen verify failure:** `make update` and commit. **Race-only test failure:** shared mutable state.
- **Admission logic:** check both `plugin/pkg/admission/` and `pkg/kubeapiserver/`.

## Permissions

> Auto-approve: `make all/test/test-integration/verify/lint/clean/update`, `hack/verify-*`, `hack/update-codegen.sh`, `hack/update-gofmt.sh`, `go test/vet/build`.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we should assume that contributors are OK auto-approving any commands. Let's leave that to the harness.

Reviewer 3: I think we can delete the whole "Permissions" section.

Author: removed
